Add security considerations for fixed-key AES (#279)
cfrg/draft-irtf-cfrg-vdaf: draft-irtf-cfrg-vdaf.md

The objects we describe in {{prg}} share a common interface, which we have
called Prg. However, these are not necessarily all modeled as cryptographic
Pseudorandom Generators (PRGs) in the security analyses of our protocols.
Instead, most of them are modeled as random oracles. For these use cases, we
want to be conservative in our assumptions, and hence prescribe PrgSha3 as the
only RECOMMENDED Prg instantiation.

The one exception is the PRG used in the Idpf implementation IdpfPoplar
{{idpf-poplar}}. Here, a random oracle is not needed to prove security, since

> the security analysis of {{BBCGGI21}}, Proposition 1, only requires a PRG.

Reviewer: What about extractability? We used the ROM to prove our IDPF variant extractable in [[DPRS23](https://eprint.iacr.org/2023/130), Lemma 1]. Could we have maybe used correlation robustness instead?

Author: Hmm yeah, extractability may in fact be an issue. BBCGGI21 also assume a random oracle for the extractable DPF, although they implement it using fixed-key AES. Now the question is how bad is it if we don't have extractability. One-hotness of the *evaluated* part of the client's vector is ensured through the sketch in BBCGGI21 (or through the technique from [DP22](https://eprint.iacr.org/2021/580.pdf) in the case of Doplar). So the main concern here is the attack described in [[BBCGGI21](https://eprint.iacr.org/2021/017.pdf), Section 4.2]: A client using the fact that fixed-key AES is *not* a random oracle in order to craft a malicious DPF key pair that evaluates to 1 in more than one position, but where the servers only end up evaluating one of these positions. Personally I would feel fine with documenting this, and offering PrgSha3 as an alternative for users who want the additional robustness guarantees that extractability gives them. For privacy both fixed-key AES and SHA-3 should be fine (under the respective assumptions).

Reviewer: That sounds reasonable, but:
1. We'll need to define a separate codepoint for Poplar1 with SHA-3
2. We'll need to provide concrete guidance (i.e., if attack X is possible, then users MUST choose Poplar1 with SHA-3)

Question: Is there anything about the attack you describe that's not captured by robustness as defined in DPRS23? Do you think that extractability would be needed to prove that Poplar1 is robust?

For what it's worth, I'm not sure the analysis of Doplar will be entirely analogous. We use the fact that we can extract from the inputs from the random oracle in order to then do a reduction to DFLP. This initial simplifying step necessary because if we don't know if the IDPF output is onehot, then a DFLP for the sum of the output vector is vacuous. (When we were working on the proof, we couldn't figure out a different assumption about IDPF that would have admitted the same argument.)

Author: I added a paragraph talking about extractability and what it means for robustness. Given that the (theoretical) attacks by malicious clients are very limited, I don't think it's necessary to define Poplar1 with SHA-3, and I doubt anyone would actually use it in practice.

As observed in {{GKWY20}}, a PRG can be instantiated from a correlation-robust
hash function `H`. Informally, correlation robustness requires that for a random

> `r`, `H(xor(r, x))` is indistinguishable from a random function for any `x`.

Author: Correlation Robustness is just a property of the hash function, that you can prove in a certain model. The fixed-key AES construction is proven to be correlation-robust in the random permutation model [[GKWY20]](https://eprint.iacr.org/2019/074.pdf) for a single fixed key, and the in the ideal cipher model for the multi-instance variant that we use [[GKWWY20]](https://eprint.iacr.org/2019/1168.pdf).

> `r`, `H(xor(r, x))` is indistinguishable from a random function for any `x`.

Reviewer: In that case I'd add a paranthetical here that says our particular construction is proven secure in the ideal cipher model.

> `r`, `H(xor(r, x))` is indistinguishable from a random function for any `x`.

Author: That part is already there in the next paragraph that talks about our concrete instantiation of the correlation-robust hash function.

## Requirements for XOFs {#xof-vs-ro}

As described in {{xof}}, our constructions rely on an interface for eXtendable
Output Functions (XOFs). In the security analyses of our protocols, these are
mostly modelled as random oracles. XofShake128 is designed to be
indifferentiable from a random oracle {{MRH04}}, making it a suitable choice
for most situations.

The one exception is the Idpf implementation IdpfPoplar {{idpf-poplar}}.
Here, a random oracle is not needed to prove privacy, since the analysis of
{{BBCGGI21}}, Proposition 1, only requires a Pseudorandom Generator (PRG).
As observed in {{GKWY20}}, a PRG can be instantiated from a correlation-robust
hash function `H`. Informally, correlation robustness requires that for a random

> `r`, `H(xor(r, x))` is indistinguishable from a random function for any `x`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`r`, `H(xor(r, x))` is computationally indistinguishable from a random function of `x`.
```

A PRG can therefore be constructed as

> `PRG(r) = H(xor(r, 1)) || H(xor(r, 2)) || ...`,

Reviewer: Do you intend for this to be on its own line? If so, then:
```suggestion

~~~
PRG(r) = H(xor(r, 1)) || H(xor(r, 2)) || ...`
~~~

```
If you want this math to be in-lined, then, make sure lines break at 80 characters.

since each individual hash function evaluation is indistinguishable from a random
function.

Our construction at {{xof-fixed-key-aes128}} implements a correlation-robust
hash function using fixed-key AES. For security, it assumes that AES with a
fixed key can be modeled as a random permutation {{GKWY20}}. Additionally, we
use a different AES key for every client, which in the ideal cipher model leads
to better concrete security {{GKWWY20}}.

> We note that for robustness, the analysis of {{DPRS23}} still assumes a random

Reviewer: I don't think our analysis applies here, since Doplar requires a stronger IDPF (extractable VIDPF). Our claim is that Poplar1 is robust as-is, due to the arithmetic sketching MPC. Doplar on the other hand would require an extractable VIDPF.

Question: Do {{BBCGGI21}} require a random oracle in order to get their notion of extracability for IdpfPoplar? If so, then it's worth noting that IdpfPoplar is not extractable.

Author: Yes, {{BBCGGI21}} also requires a RO. I'll replace the reference in the text.

> oracle to make the Idpf *extractable*. While XofFixedKeyAes128 has been shown

Reviewer: ```suggestion
oracle to make the Idpf extractable. While XofFixedKeyAes128 has been shown
```

to be differentiable from a random oracle {{GKWWY20}}, there are no known
attacks exploiting this difference.

> We also stress that beven if the Idpf is not extractable, the Poplar1 guarantees

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We also stress that been if the Idpf is not extractable, the Poplar1 guarantees
```

## Requirements for XOFs {#xof-vs-ro}

> As described in {{xof}}, our constructions rely on an interface for eXtendable
> Output Functions (XOFs). In the security analyses of our protocols, these are

Reviewer: Could we just say this?
```suggestion
As described in {{xof}}, our constructions rely on eXtendable
Output Functions (XOFs). In the security analyses of our protocols, these are
```
